docs/OPENAI_HELPER.md, before:

# Homework Helper (LLM backend)

The helper service is a Django app that exposes:

- `GET /helper/healthz`
- `POST /helper/chat`

By default, the helper is wired to a local LLM server (Ollama) for self-hosted reliability and predictable costs.
OpenAI is supported as a production-ready backend via the **Responses API** and can be enabled with env switches.

## Backend selection

Set the backend in `compose/.env`:

```bash
HELPER_LLM_BACKEND=ollama   # or "openai"
HELPER_STRICTNESS=light     # or "strict"
HELPER_SCOPE_MODE=strict    # or "soft"
HELPER_REFERENCE_FILE=/app/tutor/reference/piper_scratch.md
HELPER_REFERENCE_DIR=/app/tutor/reference
HELPER_REFERENCE_MAP={"piper_scratch":"piper_scratch.md"}
HELPER_MAX_CONCURRENCY=2
HELPER_QUEUE_MAX_WAIT_SECONDS=10
HELPER_QUEUE_POLL_SECONDS=0.2
HELPER_QUEUE_SLOT_TTL_SECONDS=120
HELPER_BACKEND_MAX_ATTEMPTS=2
HELPER_BACKOFF_SECONDS=0.4
HELPER_CIRCUIT_BREAKER_FAILURES=5
HELPER_CIRCUIT_BREAKER_TTL_SECONDS=30
HELPER_TOPIC_FILTER_MODE=strict
HELPER_TEXT_LANGUAGE_KEYWORDS=pascal,python,java,javascript,typescript,c++,c#,csharp,ruby,php,go,golang,rust,swift,kotlin
```

### Ollama (local)

Required env:

```
OLLAMA_BASE_URL=http://ollama:11434
OLLAMA_MODEL=llama3.2:1b
OLLAMA_TIMEOUT_SECONDS=30
OLLAMA_TEMPERATURE=0.2
OLLAMA_TOP_P=0.9
```

Ollama is included in `compose/docker-compose.yml` and persists models at
`data/ollama/`. Pull a model with:

```bash
cd compose
docker compose exec ollama ollama pull llama3.2:1b
```

On CPU-only servers with limited RAM, keep the model small (1B–2B range).
Larger models may be too slow or may not fit in memory.

If you run Ollama outside of Compose, set `OLLAMA_BASE_URL` to the host address
that containers can reach.

### OpenAI (optional)

If you want to re-enable OpenAI later:

```
HELPER_LLM_BACKEND=openai
OPENAI_API_KEY=...
OPENAI_MODEL=gpt-5.2
```

`openai` is already included in `services/homework_helper/requirements.txt`.

## Tutor stance and strictness

We support two modes:

- `HELPER_STRICTNESS=light` (default): may give direct answers, but must explain
  reasoning and include a check-for-understanding question.
- `HELPER_STRICTNESS=strict`: no final answers for graded work; respond with
  hints, steps, and questions.

The strictness switch is intentionally simple so teachers can “throw the switch”
without code changes.

## Lesson context metadata

Lesson pages now pass contextual data down to the helper widget so the backend
knows which lesson (and which topics) the student is working on:

- `data-helper-context`: lesson title/slug (or classroom summary) stored as `context`.
- `data-helper-topics`: a short summary derived from the lesson front matter (makes,
  needs, videos, session) stored as `topics`.

The helper service appends those values to the system instructions before calling
the LLM, giving you transparent, lesson-aware responses. Customize the include
or the lesson front matter to adjust how much metadata flows through.

## Allowed topics (per lesson)

You can provide an explicit allowed-topics list in lesson front matter to keep
students on the intended scope. Add either of these:

```yaml
helper_allowed_topics:
  - sprites
  - motion blocks
  - saving .sb3
```

The helper will gently redirect questions outside this list when
`HELPER_TOPIC_FILTER_MODE=soft` (no blocking) and will redirect when set to `strict`.

You can also auto-generate a starter list from lesson markdown:

```bash
python3 scripts/add_helper_allowed_topics.py \
  --lessons-dir services/classhub/content/courses/piper_scratch_12_session/lessons \
  --write
```

## New course scaffold

To create a brand-new course folder + lesson stubs + a reference file:

```bash
python3 scripts/new_course_scaffold.py \
  --slug robotics_intro \
  --title "Robotics: Sensors + Motion" \
  --sessions 8 \
  --duration 75 \
  --age-band "5th-7th"
```

## Course reference facts

You can reinforce subject expertise by providing a reference file with concrete
facts and workflows for the course. The helper will include this text in the
system instructions:

```
HELPER_REFERENCE_FILE=/app/tutor/reference/piper_scratch.md
```

The example `piper_scratch.md` lives in the helper image and can be edited to
match your curriculum.

### Multiple reference files (per course or lesson)

Use a reference key in `course.yaml` or `lesson` entries:

```
helper_reference: piper_scratch
```

Then configure a map in `.env` so the helper can resolve the key to a file:

```
HELPER_REFERENCE_DIR=/app/tutor/reference
HELPER_REFERENCE_MAP={"piper_scratch":"piper_scratch.md"}
```

This keeps file access safe and lets you swap references per lesson or course.

### Per-lesson references generated from content

For lesson-specific expertise, generate one reference file per lesson slug.
The helper will load `reference_dir/<lesson_slug>.md` when a lesson sets
`helper_reference: <lesson_slug>` in `course.yaml`.

Generate references from the course markdown:

```bash
python scripts/generate_lesson_references.py \
  --course services/classhub/content/courses/piper_scratch_12_session/course.yaml \
  --out services/homework_helper/tutor/reference
```

## Scope mode

Use `HELPER_SCOPE_MODE` to control how strictly the helper stays within the lesson:

- `soft` (default): prefer lesson scope, gently redirect off-topic requests
- `strict`: refuse unrelated questions and ask students to rephrase

## Queue / concurrency limits

On CPU-only servers, limit concurrent model calls to avoid overload.
The helper uses a small Redis-backed slot queue:

- `HELPER_MAX_CONCURRENCY`: maximum simultaneous LLM calls (default: 2)
- `HELPER_QUEUE_MAX_WAIT_SECONDS`: how long to wait for a slot (default: 10)
- `HELPER_QUEUE_POLL_SECONDS`: polling interval (default: 0.2)
- `HELPER_QUEUE_SLOT_TTL_SECONDS`: auto-release safety timeout (default: 120)

## Backend resilience + telemetry

The helper now retries transient backend failures before returning an error.

- `HELPER_BACKEND_MAX_ATTEMPTS`: total backend attempts per request (default: 2)
- `HELPER_BACKOFF_SECONDS`: base exponential backoff (default: 0.4)
- `HELPER_CIRCUIT_BREAKER_FAILURES`: consecutive failures before temporary open-circuit (default: 5)
- `HELPER_CIRCUIT_BREAKER_TTL_SECONDS`: open-circuit duration and failure-window TTL (default: 30)

`POST /helper/chat` responses now include:
- `request_id` (also returned as `X-Request-ID` response header)
- `attempts`
- timing fields (`queue_wait_ms`, `total_ms`) on successful calls

Service logs now emit structured helper chat events (rate limits, queue busy,
backend failures, successful calls) for easier operational tracing.

## Access boundary

`POST /helper/chat` now requires an authenticated classroom context:

- student session (`student_id` + `class_id` in Django session), or
- staff-authenticated teacher session.

This prevents anonymous/public use of helper capacity. CSRF protection remains enabled.

Canonical policy notes live in:

- `services/homework_helper/tutor/fixtures/policy_prompts.md`
- `docs/HELPER_POLICY.md`

## RAG (planned)

Phase 2 will retrieve relevant snippets from class materials and include citations.

## Evals (recommended)

- `services/homework_helper/tutor/fixtures/eval_prompts.jsonl`
- `docs/HELPER_EVALS.md`

Commit message:

Hardened admin security and improved CI test visibility.
Enforced OTP-based 2FA for Django admin in both services (classhub and homework_helper) using django-otp.
Replaced legacy admin permission overrides with OTP-aware custom admin sites and added DJANGO_ADMIN_2FA_REQUIRED (default on).
Added bootstrap_admin_otp management command to provision/rotate admin TOTP devices (with optional static backup token).
Updated admin login template to support OTP form fields cleanly.
Added regression tests for:
superuser access requiring 2FA by default
explicit 2FA-off override behavior
OTP bootstrap command behavior
Added CI coverage reporting to test-suite workflow:
runs tests under coverage
emits coverage reports in logs
uploads coverage-classhub.xml and coverage-helper.xml artifacts
Updated docs and ops guardrails (SECURITY, RUNBOOK, DISASTER_RECOVERY, DECISIONS, checklist files) and .env validation to reflect the new admin 2FA baseline.

docs/OPENAI_HELPER.md, after:

# Homework Helper (LLM backend)

The helper service is a Django app that exposes:

- `GET /helper/healthz`
- `POST /helper/chat`

By default, the helper is wired to a local LLM server (Ollama) for self-hosted reliability and predictable costs.
OpenAI is supported as a production-ready backend via the **Responses API** and can be enabled with env switches.

## Backend selection

Set the backend in `compose/.env`:

```bash
HELPER_LLM_BACKEND=ollama   # or "openai"
HELPER_STRICTNESS=light     # or "strict"
HELPER_SCOPE_MODE=strict    # or "soft"
HELPER_REFERENCE_FILE=/app/tutor/reference/piper_scratch.md
HELPER_REFERENCE_DIR=/app/tutor/reference
HELPER_REFERENCE_MAP={"piper_scratch":"piper_scratch.md"}
HELPER_SCOPE_TOKEN_MAX_AGE_SECONDS=7200
HELPER_RESPONSE_MAX_CHARS=2200
HELPER_MAX_CONCURRENCY=2
HELPER_QUEUE_MAX_WAIT_SECONDS=10
HELPER_QUEUE_POLL_SECONDS=0.2
HELPER_QUEUE_SLOT_TTL_SECONDS=120
HELPER_BACKEND_MAX_ATTEMPTS=2
HELPER_BACKOFF_SECONDS=0.4
HELPER_CIRCUIT_BREAKER_FAILURES=5
HELPER_CIRCUIT_BREAKER_TTL_SECONDS=30
HELPER_TOPIC_FILTER_MODE=strict
HELPER_TEXT_LANGUAGE_KEYWORDS=pascal,python,java,javascript,typescript,c++,c#,csharp,ruby,php,go,golang,rust,swift,kotlin
```

### Ollama (local)

Required env:

```
OLLAMA_BASE_URL=http://ollama:11434
OLLAMA_MODEL=llama3.2:1b
OLLAMA_TIMEOUT_SECONDS=30
OLLAMA_TEMPERATURE=0.2
OLLAMA_TOP_P=0.9
OLLAMA_NUM_PREDICT=400
```

Ollama is included in `compose/docker-compose.yml` and persists models at
`data/ollama/`. Pull a model with:

```bash
cd compose
docker compose exec ollama ollama pull llama3.2:1b
```

On CPU-only servers with limited RAM, keep the model small (1B–2B range).
Larger models may be too slow or may not fit in memory.

If you run Ollama outside of Compose, set `OLLAMA_BASE_URL` to the host address
that containers can reach.

### OpenAI (optional)

If you want to re-enable OpenAI later:

```
HELPER_LLM_BACKEND=openai
OPENAI_API_KEY=...
OPENAI_MODEL=gpt-5.2
OPENAI_MAX_OUTPUT_TOKENS=400
```

`openai` is already included in `services/homework_helper/requirements.txt`.

## Tutor stance and strictness

We support two modes:

- `HELPER_STRICTNESS=light` (default): may give direct answers, but must explain
  reasoning and include a check-for-understanding question.
- `HELPER_STRICTNESS=strict`: no final answers for graded work; respond with
  hints, steps, and questions.

The strictness switch is intentionally simple so teachers can “throw the switch”
without code changes.

## Lesson context metadata

Lesson pages now sign contextual metadata and pass it to the helper as a scope token:

- `data-helper-scope-token`: signed payload containing:
  - `context`
  - `topics`
  - `allowed_topics`
  - `reference`

Homework Helper verifies this token server-side and uses only the signed scope
for student requests. This prevents client-side request edits from widening
lesson scope.

## Allowed topics (per lesson)

You can provide an explicit allowed-topics list in lesson front matter to keep
students on the intended scope. Add either of these:

```yaml
helper_allowed_topics:
  - sprites
  - motion blocks
  - saving .sb3
```

The helper will gently redirect questions outside this list when
`HELPER_TOPIC_FILTER_MODE=soft` (no blocking) and will redirect when set to `strict`.

You can also auto-generate a starter list from lesson markdown:

```bash
python3 scripts/add_helper_allowed_topics.py \
  --lessons-dir services/classhub/content/courses/piper_scratch_12_session/lessons \
  --write
```

## New course scaffold

To create a brand-new course folder + lesson stubs + a reference file:

```bash
python3 scripts/new_course_scaffold.py \
  --slug robotics_intro \
  --title "Robotics: Sensors + Motion" \
  --sessions 8 \
  --duration 75 \
  --age-band "5th-7th"
```

## Course reference facts

You can reinforce subject expertise by providing a reference file with concrete
facts and workflows for the course. The helper will include this text in the
system instructions:

```
HELPER_REFERENCE_FILE=/app/tutor/reference/piper_scratch.md
```

The example `piper_scratch.md` lives in the helper image and can be edited to
match your curriculum.

### Multiple reference files (per course or lesson)

Use a reference key in `course.yaml` or `lesson` entries:

```
helper_reference: piper_scratch
```

Then configure a map in `.env` so the helper can resolve the key to a file:

```
HELPER_REFERENCE_DIR=/app/tutor/reference
HELPER_REFERENCE_MAP={"piper_scratch":"piper_scratch.md"}
```

This keeps file access safe and lets you swap references per lesson or course.

### Per-lesson references generated from content

For lesson-specific expertise, generate one reference file per lesson slug.
The helper will load `reference_dir/<lesson_slug>.md` when a lesson sets
`helper_reference: <lesson_slug>` in `course.yaml`.

Generate references from the course markdown:

```bash
python scripts/generate_lesson_references.py \
  --course services/classhub/content/courses/piper_scratch_12_session/course.yaml \
  --out services/homework_helper/tutor/reference
```

## Scope mode

Use `HELPER_SCOPE_MODE` to control how strictly the helper stays within the lesson:

- `soft` (default): prefer lesson scope, gently redirect off-topic requests
- `strict`: refuse unrelated questions and ask students to rephrase

## Queue / concurrency limits

On CPU-only servers, limit concurrent model calls to avoid overload.
The helper uses a small Redis-backed slot queue:

- `HELPER_MAX_CONCURRENCY`: maximum simultaneous LLM calls (default: 2)
- `HELPER_QUEUE_MAX_WAIT_SECONDS`: how long to wait for a slot (default: 10)
- `HELPER_QUEUE_POLL_SECONDS`: polling interval (default: 0.2)
- `HELPER_QUEUE_SLOT_TTL_SECONDS`: auto-release safety timeout (default: 120)

## Response length controls

- `HELPER_RESPONSE_MAX_CHARS`: hard cap on returned assistant text length (default: `2200`, minimum enforced `200`)
- `OPENAI_MAX_OUTPUT_TOKENS`: optional Responses API output-token cap (set `0` to disable)
- `OLLAMA_NUM_PREDICT`: optional Ollama generation-token cap (set `0` to use model default)

## Backend resilience + telemetry

The helper now retries transient backend failures before returning an error.

- `HELPER_BACKEND_MAX_ATTEMPTS`: total backend attempts per request (default: 2)
- `HELPER_BACKOFF_SECONDS`: base exponential backoff (default: 0.4)
- `HELPER_CIRCUIT_BREAKER_FAILURES`: consecutive failures before temporary open-circuit (default: 5)
- `HELPER_CIRCUIT_BREAKER_TTL_SECONDS`: open-circuit duration and failure-window TTL (default: 30)

`POST /helper/chat` responses now include:
- `request_id` (also returned as `X-Request-ID` response header)
- `attempts`
- timing fields (`queue_wait_ms`, `total_ms`) on successful calls
- `truncated` when response text was clipped by `HELPER_RESPONSE_MAX_CHARS`

Service logs now emit structured helper chat events (rate limits, queue busy,
backend failures, successful calls) for easier operational tracing.

## Access boundary

`POST /helper/chat` now requires an authenticated classroom context:

- student session (`student_id` + `class_id` in Django session), or
- staff-authenticated teacher session.

This prevents anonymous/public use of helper capacity. CSRF protection remains enabled.

Canonical policy notes live in:

- `services/homework_helper/tutor/fixtures/policy_prompts.md`
- `docs/HELPER_POLICY.md`

## RAG (planned)

Phase 2 will retrieve relevant snippets from class materials and include citations.

## Evals (recommended)

- `services/homework_helper/tutor/fixtures/eval_prompts.jsonl`
- `docs/HELPER_EVALS.md`
